---
title: "The pace of mitochondrial molecular evolution varies with seasonal migration distance"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-08-03-Pegan_et_al_2023
excerpt: ""
date: 2023-08-03
venue: 'bioRxiv'
paperurl: 'https://github.com/jakeberv/jakeberv.github.io/raw/master/files/pdf/papers/Pegan_et_al_2023.pdf'
link: 'https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.01.551470'
citation: '<FONT COLOR="#ff0000">Pegan, M. T.</FONT>, <b>Berv. J. S.</b>, <FONT COLOR="#ff0000">Gulson-Castillo, E.R.</FONT>, Kimmitt, A. A., Winger, B. M., The pace of mitochondrial molecular evolution varies with seasonal migration distance. <i>in press, Evolution</i> 2023.08.01.551470 <FONT COLOR="#ff0000">Student advisee</FONT>'
---

[Download paper here](https://github.com/jakeberv/jakeberv.github.io/raw/master/files/pdf/papers/Pegan_et_al_2023.pdf){: .btn--research}

Abstract: Animals that engage in long-distance seasonal migration experience strong selective pressures on their metabolic performance and life history, with potential consequences for molecular evolution. Species with slow life histories typically show lower rates of synonymous substitution (dS) than “fast” species. Previous work has suggested that long-distance seasonal migrants have a slower life history strategy than short-distance migrants, raising the possibility that rates of molecular evolution may covary with migration distance. Additionally, long-distance migrants may face strong selection on metabolically important mitochondrial genes owing to their long-distance flights. Using over 1000 mitochondrial genomes, we assessed the relationship between migration distance and mitochondrial molecular evolution in 39 boreal-breeding migratory bird species. We show that migration distance correlates negatively with dS, suggesting that the slow life history associated with long-distance migration is reflected in rates of molecular evolution. Mitochondrial genes in every study species exhibited evidence of purifying selection, but the strength of selection was greater in short-distance migrants, contrary to our predictions. This result may indicate selection for cold tolerance on mitochondrial evolution among species overwintering at high latitudes. Our study demonstrates that the pervasive correlation between life history and molecular evolutionary rates exists in the context of differential adaptations to seasonality.

Recommended citation: Pegan, T. M., Berv, J. S., Gulson-Castillo, E. R., Kimmitt, A. A., & Winger, B. M. The pace of mitochondrial molecular evolution varies with seasonal migration distance. 2023. <i>bioRxiv</i>. <https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.21.513146>
